---
title: "Prep 1: setup SSH connection with the cloud"
teaching: 0
exercises: 15
questions:
objectives:
- Connect from your local machine to the Virtual Machine (VM) on cloud for this workshop
---


On the days of the workshops you will get the following:
* a compressed file
* an IP number
* a passphrase

Let's see how to use them.


### *Windows* users only

The **best way** to connect is via **MobaXterm**.  
If you cannot use MobaXterm, Visual Studio Code or PuTTY will work, too.  

In MobaXterm, pick the menu item `Settings -> Configuration`, select the `SSH` tab, and then ensure that the box for `X11-Forwarding` is checked.  

More instructions can be found in this [Pawsey documentation page](https://support.pawsey.org.au/documentation/x/Ao22Ag).


### Get ready with the SSH key

Assume the compressed file is named `rsa_bio.zip`.  It is a SSH key, *i.e.* a way to enforce security measures when connecting to remote computers such as cloud VMs.  

Download the file and unzip it by double-clicking on it.  Then open up a shell terminal (or MobaXterm local terminal in *Windows*, using the button `Start local terminal`) and change directory to the directory where you downloaded it:

```
$ cd <DIRECTORY WITH YOUR ZIP FILE>
```
{: .bash}

Define a variable with the file full path (note the prepended `$(PWD)/`) and name, without the `.zip` extension:

```
$ export KEY="$(PWD)/<YOUR KEY FILE WITHOUT .ZIP>"
```
{: .bash}

Check that the unzipped file is there:

```
$ ls $KEY
```
{: .bash}

```
/home/ubuntu/rsa_bio
```
{: .output}

Use the following command to set appropriate access permissions:

```
$ chmod 600 $KEY
```
{: .bash}


### Connect to the VM on the Nimbus cloud

You'll use the command `ssh` to connect.  
It's time to use the IP address you got; it's a string made up of four numbers separated by dots, such as `123.123.123.123`.

Assuming you're in the directory containing the SSH key, this is the full command (macOS users, use `-Y` rather than `-X`):

```
$ ssh -i $KEY -X ubuntu@<YOUR IP ADDRESS>
```
{: .bash}

You should get an output like:

```
The authenticity of host '146.118.65.140 (146.118.65.140)' can't be established.
ECDSA key fingerprint is SHA256:f4IZsAASIbZvC/Q+MN32F9jCEdvFwp5hDw9YoB7ClQw.
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])? 
```
{: .output}

Reply `yes` and press `Enter`.

Now, you will get asked a passphrase:

```
Enter passphrase for key 'rsa_bio':
```
{: .output}

Type the one you got communicated, and press `Enter`.

You should now get a new prompt starting with `ubuntu`... you're in the Nimbus VM!

**Note**: the flags `-X`/`-Y` are used to enable X11 forwarding for one exercise in the session on graphical applications.  If you get errors related to *X11 forwarding* let us know.


> ## Use at least two terminal tabs
> 
> We advise you to open at least two terminal tabs, and connect to the VM from both of them.  In this way, you can use one to edit files, and one to execute commands, thus making your workflow more efficient.
{: .callout}
