---
title: "Prep 2: refresher on the Linux shell (bash)"
teaching: 0
exercises: 15
questions:
objectives:
- Recapitulate on shell commands that are useful for this workshop
---


### Handling directories and files

Let's first navigate to our instance's home (you could omit `~` to get home, too):
```
$ cd ~
```
{: .bash}

Check the path of the *current working directory*:
```
$ pwd
```
{: .bash}
```
/home/ubuntu
```
{: .output}

Go to the *parent* directory of the current one:
```
$ cd ..
```
{: .bash}

Check where you are:
```
$ pwd
```
{: .bash}
```
/home
```
{: .output}

Now navigate to the data directory for this workshop, `/data`:
```
$ cd /data
```
{: .bash}

To make a new file, *e.g.* an empty text file:
```
$ touch empty.txt
```
{: .bash}

We can check the content of this directory, to see whether the file has been created:
```
$ ls
```
{: .bash}
```
empty.txt
```
{: .output}

Get details about files and directories with:
```
$ ls -l
```
{: .bash}
```
-rw-r-----  1 ubuntu ubuntu      0 Jun  6 15:24 empty.txt
```
{: .output}

To make a copy of a file with another name:
```
$ cp empty.txt empty-copy.txt 
```
{: .bash}

To rename a file:
```
$ mv empty-copy.txt empty-second.txt
```
{: .bash}

To move a file to another directory, *e.g.* your home (still `mv`, but now the second argument is an existing directory):

```
$ mv empty-second.txt /home/ubuntu/
```
{: .bash}

Now let's remove both files:
```
$ rm empty.txt /home/ubuntu/empty-second.txt
```
{: .bash}

To discover the location of an application that is available in the environment:
```
$ which bash
```
{: .bash}
```
/bin/bash
```
{: .output}


### Defining variables

We can define a variable for a string of characters, *e.g.* a name, a filename or a directory.  The variable can be used later on in the script or in the shell to refer to that string:
```
$ HELLO="ciao"
```
{: .bash}

We can check that it was defined correctly:
```
$ echo $HELLO
```
{: .bash}
```
ciao
```
{: .output}

If we want the variable to be accessible inside sub-processes, we need to `export` it:
```
$ export WORLD="mondo"
```
{: .bash}

A process could be a container, or just another bash shell:
```
$ bash -c 'echo $HELLO $WORLD'
```
{: .bash}
```
mondo
```
{: .output}

Only the exported one is available in the sub-process.

We might use a variable for a directory path:
```
$ MYHOME="/home/ubuntu"
```
{: .bash}

Now we can use this variable with commands that operate on directories:
```
$ cd $MYHOME
$ pwd
```
{: .bash}
```
/home/ubuntu
```
{: .output}

There's a way to store the output of a command inside the variable.  It uses the form `$( .. )`.  For instance, let's obtain the path of the current working directory from the command `cmd`, and store it in the variable `myplace`:

```
$ myplace=$(pwd)
$ echo $myplace
```
{: .bash}

```
/home/ubuntu
```
{: .output}

Every shell session automatically defines a number of variables, some of which can be useful.  
Among others, `$HOME` contains the path to your home directory, `$USER` contains your username, and `$PATH` has the list of paths where the shell looks for executable programs and scripts.


### Visualising contents of text files

Let's now create a text file with some words in it.  We'll use a popular, friendly text editor called `nano`:
```
$ nano words.txt
```
{: .bash}

In the editor screen, write something random.

To save this text, press `Ctrl-O`, then `Enter`.  
To exit, press `Ctrl-X`.

Now we want to visualise the contents of this file on our terminal.

We can use `cat` to display it all in one go:
```
$ cat words.txt
```
{: .bash}
```
random words that we just saved in this file
```
{: .output}

For very long files, we might want to be able to navigate the content in chunks.  We can achieve this with `less`:
```
$ less words.txt
```
{: .bash}

Go forward by pressing `Ctrl-F`, go backwards with `Ctrl-B`.  
Quit the navigation by pressing `q`.
