---
title: "Session 2: setting up graphical applications"
teaching: 10
exercises: 50
questions:
objectives:
---


### Goals

In this session, we're having a look at examples of how to setup and run containerised applications that feature a graphical user interface (GUI).  

In particular we'll cover:
* an RStudio web server (with a phylogenetic tree package)
* a Jupyter Notebook web server (with a visualisation library for interaction networks)
* an X11 windowed application (Gnuplot, a data analysis utility)

For the first two exercises, we're going to review the following Singularity syntax:
* `singularity exec` to run commands from containers;
* some *runtime flags* for `exec`, namely `-B` and `-C`;
* *shell variables* for Singularity, *i.e.* prepended with `SINGULARITYENV_`.

With the third exercise, I will discuss what are the requirements to run an X11 application in containers, and guide you through a small case.

The RStudio example follows the webinar episode [GUI enabled web applications: RStudio in a container](https://pawseysc.github.io/singularity-containers/23-web-rstudio/index.html).  Here, however, you'll go in greater detail, and proceed step by step yourself.


### GUIDED - Run a containerised R analysis from command line

Let's cd in the appropriate directory:

```
$ cd /data/containers-bioinformatics-workshop
$ export WORK=$(pwd)
$ cd exercises/graphical
```
{: .bash}

Now, suppose we need to set an R analysis pipeline.  We will need to run it on different systems, both via command line interface (CLI) and RStudio, and even share the protocol with other collaborators.  Hence using a container seems a great choice to improve portability and reproducibility.  

The R script is at `home_rstudio/script.r`.  It creates a graphical representation of a very simple phylogenetic tree.  This is based on the example on [Chapter 5](https://yulab-smu.github.io/treedata-book/chapter5.html) of the online book by Yu Lab.  
The required toolset consists of the `tidyverse` collection plus the `ggtree` package (this setup is used in the session on building as well).

We've made the image already available on Docker Hub: `marcodelapierre/ggtree:2.0.4`.  Let's pull it:

```
$ singularity pull docker://marcodelapierre/ggtree:2.0.4
```
{: .bash}

You might now that every R installation ships with a utility to run scripts from the command line, so in this case we can go `Rscript home_rstudio/script.r`.  


> ## Let's run the R script through CLI
> 
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ```
> > $ singularity exec ggtree_2.0.4.sif Rscript home_rstudio/script.r
> > ```
> > {: .bash}
> > 
> > We'll get an image file as an output, `tree.png`:
> > 
> > ```
> > $ ls -lh tree.png
> > ```
> > {: .bash}
> > 
> > ```
> > -rw-r--r-- 1 ubuntu ubuntu  96K Jun  9 05:52 tree.png
> > ```
> > {: .output}
> > 
> > To save time, I can show you the content of this file from my screen.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}


### ROOM - Spawn an interactive RStudio web session

All right, now it's your turn: I want you to work out the setup to run a containerised Rstudio session.  

Actually, you already saw the solution during the webinar, so getting it right is not the main point.  
The point is to stop at each step of its construction, to understand why it's needed.  You'll see a mix of arguments, relative both to the general containerised setup and to the specific way the `rocker` container you're using is setup.

At the end, you'll also be able to re-run the phylogenetic tree script you already executed through command line.

#### Hints
* you're using the same container as above: `ggtree_2.0.4.sif`;
* the command to start an Rstudio server is `rserver --www-port 8787 --www-address 0.0.0.0 --auth-none=0 --auth-pam-helper-path=pam-helper`;
* you'll embed it in a `singularity exec` command;
* you'll add flags to this command (see steps below);
* retrieve the IP address of your Nimbus VM;
* open the browser and go to the web address `http://<YOUR NIMBUS VM'S IP>:8787`; you'll monitor the outcome of your setup here.


> ## On the `rserver` command syntax
> 
> Why are we going to run the following?
> 
> ```
> rserver --www-port 8787 --www-address 0.0.0.0 --auth-none=0 --auth-pam-helper-path=pam-helper
> ```
> {: .source}
> 
> * `--www-port 8787` sets the communication port the Rstudio server will listen at for incoming connections; `8787` is a common choice for Rstudio;
> * `--www-address 0.0.0.0` is to let connections come from all IP addresses on the host machine, for instance not only local ones but also ones coming through the internet (this will be our case of usage);
> * `--auth-none=0` is to keep password authentication enabled, a wise security choice;
> * `--auth-pam-helper-path=pam-helper` is to use a specific utility for authentication, that allows to define the password as an environment variable prior to starting the server.
{: .callout}


> ## First attempt: plain
> 
> Just run the command above from within the `ggtree` container.  
> 
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ```
> > $ singularity exec ggtree_2.0.4.sif \
> >     rserver --www-port 8787 --www-address 0.0.0.0 --auth-none=0 --auth-pam-helper-path=pam-helper
> > ```
> > {: .bash}
> > 
> > ```
> > 
> > ```
> > {: .output}
> {: .solution}
> 
> Now go to the browser and open the web address `http://<YOUR NIMBUS VM'S IP>:8787`.  What happens?
> 
> > ## Comments
> > 
> > You're getting a welcome page, good!  The server is up and running.
> > 
> > However, You're getting prompted for a username and password.  
> > You can get your username with `echo $USER`, or in alternative from the output of the command `whoami`.  It's `ubuntu`.
> > 
> > However, you have no password to enter.
> > 
> > You can now kill the server from the terminal by hitting `Ctrl-C`.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}


> ## Second attempt: setup access credentials
> 
> This modification is required by the way RStudio works: if we want authentication on the web server, we need to define a `PASSWORD` variable in the shell environment.
> 
> Define the `PASSWORD` variable prior to re-running the `singularity exec` command.
> 
> **Hints**:
> * define it as `SINGULARITYENV_PASSWORD`, this is a good practice to ensure it's always passed in the container, even if we're enabling further isolation (see further down);
> * define it by prepending `export`, as the variable needs to be available to `singularity`, which is a *sub-process* of the active shell;
> * for completeness, also define the USER name with `SINGULARITYENV_USER` in the same way, again to ensure this is defined also if the container has tighter isolation.
> 
> > ## Solution
> > 
> > ```
> > $ export SINGULARITYENV_PASSWORD="<Pick-Your-Password>"
> > $ export SINGULARITYENV_USER="$USER"
> > $ singularity exec ggtree_2.0.4.sif \
> >     rserver --www-port 8787 --www-address 0.0.0.0 --auth-none=0 --auth-pam-helper-path=pam-helper
> > ```
> > {: .bash}
> > 
> > ```
> > 
> > ```
> > {: .output}
> {: .solution}
> 
> Re-load the page in the web-browser.  
> Now you now what credentials to use for access.
> 
> What happens?
> 
> > ## Comments
> > 
> > You will get to the next screen, however an error message is popping up: **Error occurred during transmission**.  If you click on **OK** you'll get a blank screen.
> > 
> > If you check the terminal where you launched the server from, there's no error message.  Not really helpful.
> > 
> > Kill the session again with `Ctrl-C`.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}


## Third attempt: a writable location

